Endometriosis is a disorder in which endometrial tissue grows on or outside the uterus. While endometriosis affects roughly 190 million people around the world, little research exists exploring both the causes of endometriosis and preventative treatment of progressive factors. One theory for endometriosis is an imbalance of estradiol, E2, and progesterone, P4, in the body. An elevated ratio of E2 to P4 can indicate the growth of endometriosis lesions, which are another source of E2 production. Such lesions disrupt regular E2 levels throughout the menstrual cycle, resulting in continuous endometrium growth. The relationship between E2 levels and lesion growth – and an increased ratio of E2 to P4 – was demonstrated using Margolskee et al.’s 2013 model of the menstrual cycle and Arbeláz-Gómez et al.’s 2022 model of endometrium growth. The model proposed in this code uses differential equations to demonstrate the growth of both the endometrium and endometriosis lesions, over time, caused by excess estradiol being introduced into a system. The equations feature a feedback loop, in which the amount of estradiol being introduced in the system increases as the size of the lesions increases, hence a cyclic relationship. Periodic exogenous E2 suppression was shown to be an effective treatment for preventing excessive endometrial tissue volume in the presence of lesions.

Programming was performed in Matlab, and Simulink was used to create the feedback loop. 

This project was completed during the summer of 2024 at the Simons Laufer Mathematical Sciences Institute while I participated in the Research Experience for Undergraduates, "Mathematical Sciences Research Institute - Undergraduate Program."
